Publish 25.0.0.4-beta blog post (#4350)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2025-04-08-25.0.0.4-beta.adoc

For more information on Java 24, see the following resources:

- link:https://jdk.java.net/24/release-notes[Release notes]
- link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/24/docs/api/index.html[Javadocs]
- link:https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=24[Download page].

[#telemetry]
== Send Liberty HTTP access logs to OpenTelemetry using MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0

link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/microprofile-telemetry.html[MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0] (`mpTelemetry-2.0`) enables OpenTelemetry to collect and export traces, metrics, and logs.

You can now use the `mpTelemetry-2.0` feature to collect link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/access-logging.html[Liberty HTTP access logs] to OpenTelemetry. This new log source is in addition to the previously available Open Liberty runtime log sources (messages, traces, ffdcs, audit) and application logs generated by the `java.util.logging` (JUL) API.

> To enable the MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 feature to collect HTTP access logs, enable the feature and configure the `httpEndpoint` and optionally the `httpAccessLogging` configuration elements. Also specify the new `accessLog` source to the source attribute. Also set the `accessLogFields` attribute to `default` or `logFormat` for the `mpTelemetry` configuration element, as shown in the following `server.xml` example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 feature to collect HTTP access logs, enable the feature and configure the `httpEndpoint` and optionally the `httpAccessLogging` configuration elements. Include the new `accessLog` value in the `source` attribute of the `mpTelemtry` configuration element. Also set the `accessLogFields` attribute to `default` or `logFormat` for the `mpTelemetry` configuration element, as shown in the following `server.xml` example:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
    ...
</featureManager>

<httpAccessLogging id="accessLogging" logFormat='%h %u %{t}W "%r" %s %b %D %{R}W'/>
<httpEndpoint id="defaultHttpEndpoint" accessLoggingRef="accessLogging" httpPort="9080" httpsPort="9443"/>

<mpTelemetry accessLogFields="logFormat" source="message,trace,ffdc,accessLog"/>
----

[#backport]
== File-based health checks and Java EE 7 and 8 compatibility for MicroProfile Health 4.0

> The MicroProfile Health 4.0 feature (`mpHealth-4.0`) enables a runtime for the Open Liberty server that previously supported only Jakarta EE 9 or later. In this beta release, the `mpHealth-4.0` feature is now also supported with in Java EE7 and EE8 environments. Also, a file-based health check mechanism is introduced as an alternative to using the `/health/*` REST endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MicroProfile Health 4.0 feature (`mpHealth-4.0`) enables a runtime for the Open Liberty server that previously supported only Jakarta EE 9 or later. In this beta release, the `mpHealth-4.0` feature is now also supported within Java EE 7 and EE 8 environments. Also, a file-based health check mechanism is introduced as an alternative to using the `/health/*` REST endpoints.
```

> The MicroProfile Health technology is most effective when the application is deployed onto a Kubernetes based environment where link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/['Liveness', 'Readiness' and 'Startup' Probes] can be used. In such a deployment scenario, applications that are deployed might be on different Java and Jakarta EE levels. This configuration can result in a mixture of `mpHealth-x.x` features across different servers and different Kubernetes probe configurations. `mpHealth-4.0` feature is now compatible for use with Java EE7 and Java EE8 alongside its existing support for Jakarta EE9 and Jakarta EE10 environments. This feature hence unifies OpenLibety server configurations and Kubernetes Health Check probe configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MicroProfile Health technology is most effective when the application is deployed onto a Kubernetes based environment where link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/['Liveness', 'Readiness' and 'Startup' Probes] can be used. In such a deployment scenario, applications that are deployed might be on different Java and Jakarta EE levels. This configuration can result in a mixture of `mpHealth-x.x` features across different servers and different Kubernetes probe configurations. The `mpHealth-4.0` feature is now compatible for use with Java EE 7 and Java EE 8 alongside its existing support for Jakarta EE 9 and Jakarta EE 10 environments. This feature hence unifies Open Liberty server configurations and Kubernetes Health Check probe configurations.
```

In addition to the link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/health-check-microservices.html[existing strategy] of querying the `/health/live`, `/health/ready`, `/health/started` REST endpoints, the 25.0.0.4-beta release introduces an alternative file-based health check functionality. When this function is enabled, the  `live`, `ready`, and `started` files are created under the `${server.output.dir}/health` directory. The `${server.output.dir}` defaults to `wlp/usr/servers/<server>`. For more information, see link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/directory-locations-properties.html[Directory locations and properties].

> The `started` file is created when the application startup health checks return an `UP` status. Similarly, the `live` and `ready` files are created when the application liveness and readiness health checks return an `UP` status. The runtime then continues querying the liveness and readiness health checks at a user-defined interval. If the status returns `UP` the last modified time of the file is updated. If a file is not updated, then it indicates that a `DOWN` status was returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `started` file is created when the application startup health checks return an `UP` status. Similarly, the `live` and `ready` files are created when the application liveness and readiness health checks return an `UP` status. The runtime then continues querying the liveness and readiness health checks at a user-defined interval. If the status returns `UP`, the last modified time of the file is updated. If a file is not updated, then it indicates that a `DOWN` status was returned.
```

> This file-based functionality is only enabled if a user configures the `fileUpdateInterval` configuration attribute for the `mpHealth` configuration element or the `MP_HEALTH_FILE_UPDATE_INTERVAL` link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[environment variable]. If both the environment variable and the `fileUpdateInterval` attribute are configured, the `server.xml` takes precedence at run time.The configuration accepts a number followed by an optional `ms` or `s` to denote the time unit. If no time unit is specified, it defaults to seconds. Invalid values default the interval to 10 seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file-based functionality is only enabled if a user configures the `fileUpdateInterval` configuration attribute for the `mpHealth` configuration element or the `MP_HEALTH_FILE_UPDATE_INTERVAL` link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/config/server-configuration-overview.html#server-env[environment variable]. If both the environment variable and the `fileUpdateInterval` attribute are configured, the `server.xml` takes precedence at run time. The configuration accepts a number followed by an optional `ms` or `s` to denote the time unit. If no time unit is specified, it defaults to seconds. Invalid values default the interval to 10 seconds.
```

-  link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/j2eeManagement-1.1.html[J2EE Management 1.1 (j2eeManagement-1.1)]
- link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/appClientSupport-1.0.html[Application Client Support for Server 1.0 (appClientSupport-1.0)]
- link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/appClientSupport-2.0.html[Jakarta Application Client Support for Server 2.0 (appClientSupport-2.0)]
- link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/wsSecurity-1.1.html[Web Service Security 1.1 (wsSecurity-1.1)]

[#run]
=== Try it now

> To try out these features, update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 21, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To try out these features, update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 24, Java SE 21, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.
```
